abstract:

Since the early 2000s, the rise of mass timber and CLT products as a new ‘promising’ sustainable alternative to typical steel and concrete construction has led to a boom in its production in regions of Europe, especially Scandinavia. Recent years have shown an increase in global interest for these products from designers, developers and builders alike. However, the rapid fetishization of this product as an answer to the global climate crisis has overshadowed the lack of a critical understanding of the social and ecological implications surrounding their material production. Sweden is often viewed as the world's most sustainable forestry industry and is regulated by the Swedish Forest Agency, the national forestry authority and the regulating body of all forest land. They claim to be annually increasing the size of forest lands and actively promote internationally the adoption of their “Swedish Forestry Model”, a set of policies that relies on the responsibility of the forest land owner to balance productivity and sustainability. Architectural practice is removed from the forestry industry and the production of timber while the trend of natural material including mass timber and wood finishes continues to increase. Clearly, there is a need for the practice of construction and the built environment to engage with the production and maintenance of not only our built environment but the ‘natural’ environment that we heavily and constantly extract from. Our proposal aims to map and understand various Swedish landscapes that get qualified under the loosely defined term ‘forest’ with the hope to identify the fullest consequences of logging policies and practices.

background:

The definition of a ‘forest’ provided by the UN Food and Agriculture Organization’s (FAO) treats forests as only a series of trees and consequently allowing for monoculture tree plantations (which cause deforestation) to be classified as forests. Furthermore, this definition neglects the complexity of an old growth forest which not only includes human communities, but wildlife and plant species that exist within this environment. This definition is critical due to its wide reference among governing bodies, forestry agencies including the Swedish Forest Agency.

The “Swedish Forestry Model” was implemented in 1993 in every logging operation to protect the felling of trees in high biodiversity areas. However, these areas are not regulated, leaving the land to the responsibility of the forest land owner to balance productivity and sustainability. Furthermore, much of the timber sold internationally is advertised with the certification of sustainably harvested. With over 45 percent of the forested area certified as sustainably managed, the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) in conjunction with Skogssällskapet, the environmental certification agency, do not have the capacity to continuously verify these practices on site leaving much of the responsibility to landowners and the timber industry. In addition, Swedish Forestry Agency’s default timber harvesting standard is still clear cutting and monocrop seedling plantations, it has become clear from the research conducted at the Forestry School at UBC1 that this practice of clearcutting and monocropping species reduces the biodiversity and ecological sustainability of an area. With little incentive to care for the ecological habitats and systems that exist within these timberlands and increased demand in the timber industry, many owners fail to comply with standards needed for biodiversity and the maintenance of wildlife and plant species.